[Applause]
[Music]
are you doing good nice to meet you
Frank well done on the book thank you
thank you ledger not only because
obviously write the book in and of
itself isn't achievements but the nature
of this particular book yeah yeah I'm
almost exhausted
reading so Lucy if you know I've read a
good place I'm exhausted because of the
the journeys yeah it was quite a journey
always hard to summarize at any
meaningful way in a one-hour podcast or
whatever but but certainly a message
that I'm looking forward to bringing
into the world yeah where do you begin
I mean you know I can begin at the start
which is always the easiest way but I
suppose well actually you know what I
might just ask it because it's it's
ongoing this before we even get into the
book I suppose I gotta ask you is in a
way I feel it's it's a big part of the
book just anyway but how are you now how
are things I was yeah life now life is
very good now especially now that I've
finally written the book and finally
I've gone public with this in going
public with this that has been a very
healing and deepening experience
actually to claim my memories to claim
those experiences and to begin to speak
about them without inhibition has has
deepened my integration of those
experiences in my life and I don't know
where it's going I suspect in three
years I may be in a very different place
than I am now and I mean
good place now okay yeah I said what
we're talking about is but so the title
of the book is LSD and the mind of the
universe and it it's basically a
documentation of 73 high-dose LSD
sessions tricks and everything that
comes with that and all your insights so
maybe let's begin not start because it's
I I think anybody who's taken a
psychedelic will know especially warned
if you've got on one big trip you know
yeah 73
it's like 73 babies you know yeah so
maybe that starts at the start yeah what
okay you didn't know at the start that
this is what you what was going to
happen it's just you it took a joke
a new documentary but you didn't know it
would keep going going over this long
period of time yeah what happened was
fresh out of graduate school 29 years
old in the middle of my Saturn return
didn't know that yet at the time had
finished my dissertation was looking for
where to take my research I was a
brand-new professor of Religious Studies
at Youngstown State University and I
read Stanislav Grof realms of human
unconscious had just been published to
read at 1978 I saw that I thought I got
to get in on this this is just fantastic
it's not only extraordinary for
psychology but it'll have enormous
implications for philosophy of religion
as well so I I felt the draw I felt like
I had found my life's work I started the
work I knew that you had to you know to
write truly out of an experiential basis
first he had to do your work and that
meant doing an unspecified number of
sessions I started with three low-dose
sessions me about 200 micrograms got my
bearings got my feet wet and then I
shifted in the fourth session to
those sessions I started I worked at 500
to 600 micrograms consistently all the
way through which is not a protocol that
I recommend and yes you know in the book
I strongly do not recommend this
protocol for reasons I explained in the
book but basically recorded documented
as carefully as I could
kept all the variables as consistent as
I could I think one of the things that
makes his story unusual it's not just
the depth of where it went but the
stabilization of the variables in 20
years
always the same sitter same sentence
setting same physical location Northeast
Ohio couple places with in Northeast
Ohio same medicine same dose same
protocol for recovering memories of the
session so I think that established a
very unusually stable listening post as
I entered into this dialogue with the
universe yeah I always admire works of
patience and 20 years is the work of is
yeah his patients and I I like in a way
how when you're approaching the
psychedelics at the moment obviously you
get a huge amount of coverage too I
suppose if you're into the subject at
all it seems to be everywhere and in
especially in the last six or seven
years it's in mainstream media all of
the work and then of all these
conferences put up the harsh side of
that said the dark side of psychedelics
are not spoken about maybe they are I
feel that they're not as well documented
in terms of the levels to which the mind
you the places you can go and I feel you
really have captured that so because
that really comes across very early on
and we don't want to give away the
entire book obviously and going through
it but it does you do capture there yeah
I mean if this is not like somebody's
going and getting high with friends
473 times obviously you've just said
that you go through your you had your
rigorous sort of process but you are
going into the depths of suffering
you're living and being suffering and
how to go how do you go back into that
every time knowing it's like you know
you're getting Souza's and ready for war
almost yeah
yeah in a way I mean you you have to go
through the same type of mental
preparation that a soldier does before
battle and a mother does before labor
you just really be focused internalized
and ready for whatever the day may bring
you know at the end of the first chapter
I said the single greatest concern I
have about bringing the story of my
journey forward is the amount of
suffering that it contains and so I take
some time to try to explain to the
reader to prepare the reader for what
this suffering suffering represents and
specifically the suffering of death and
rebirth that this is this is one of the
natural components of deep work with
psychedelics that in order to move into
a deeper state of consciousness a state
of consciousness where you can
experience things that the physical
consciousness cannot experience you must
surrender deeply your attachment to your
physical consciousness to your embodied
identity and you go through a death
rebirth process it's that first level of
death and rebirth around ego death I
think is frequently discussed and
honored in the therapeutic discussion
but what I think is less attended to is
the fact that when you go into still
deeper levels of consciousness beyond
the early levels and beyond the middle
levels you have to go through the same
process of radical surrender of
everything you've known to be true up to
that point in time so you have to
surrender even your own LSD experiences
your psychedelic experiences in order to
go through yet another round of death
and rebirth
in order to wake up to yet another
deeper dimensions of existence so if
you're going to press the journey hard
or long
as I did you're going to go through a
lot of purification a lot of
detoxification and a lot of death and
rebirth and the reason I think you go
through so much purification is I think
every time every deeper level of the
universe operates at a higher level of
energy so if you're going to break
through to a deeper level of
consciousness and a deeper level at the
universe you have to go through a
purification process so that your
consciousness can stabilize effectively
at that deeper level of consciousness so
that your awareness can remain coherent
there and otherwise if you don't your
awareness will always remain fragmented
you won't be able to bring back the
coherent experience but there is a lot
of suffering with it's not like there's
suffering in the universe but if you
want to explore the universe you must be
willing to go through a deep series of
purifications purifications unto death
in order to enter into that dialogue
that communion what do you what do you
think death is well as I say in the book
eventually you come to a point if you've
gone through many cycles of death and
rebirth you come to a point where the
death loses its meaning because you've
learned from experience that you can die
you can lose all your reality reference
points everything you know yourself to
be
can be shattered and destroyed but the
Phoenix always rises you always wake up
you a change you always awakens in a
deeper capacity in a deeper level of
reality so from this perspective
eventually you learn that there is no
such thing as death there is only the
shedding of one particular set of
parameters within which awareness
operates shedding those parameters and
letting consciousness expand to a deeper
experience of reality what we usually
mean and I think death of the physical
bodies some
very similar what you go through in an
LSD session deep one that type of death
approximates what happens when you go
through physical death the body dies you
lose your physical reference points
consciousness expands into a deeper and
broader universe but eventually the very
concept of death loses its meaning in
this respect yeah it was two ways it's
gonna go some I'll come back I'll come
back to the way I was going to go on
that and the grueling impact of that on
like I spoke to somebody and in a way
it's existential it can be existentially
violent a psychedelic experience yes is
and there's moments I mean I think
that's a good support description
existence Muir Island very and what's he
like
and then I don't think also that you
ever get comfortable it's not like you
suddenly go okay I've done 50 and this
is going to be no problem
because there's bigger levels is that
fair to say
and but I thought that you would go
through a period of you know death
rebirth and purging and whatnot and you
would get to a stable place and all all
entries from that point on would be
clearer and easier I found that that's
not true at the end of the universe is
infinitely deep with an infinite number
of levels and as long as you keep
pushing the outer edges of yours
experience if you're willing to go
farther at the universe will keep taking
you in deeper and it always will require
some deep surrender some death and
rebirth process to move deeper into it
and when you say universe what what do
you what's that to you
what is the nice what's that word mean
to you you know
well my experience is of course when you
let go of consciousness at the physical
level you enter into a deeper dimension
of consciousness and then later is still
a deeper dimension and still a deeper
dimension and it's all coherent from top
to bottom and it is all fundamentally
unified for me it never took a face it
never showed an identity as such it was
always open-ended and perpetually fluid
and invisible and yet very deeply felt
so what do we call this thing what do we
call this consciousness which we
dissolve into its successive levels some
might call it the infinite the absolute
I call it both of those things I call it
the creative intelligence of the
universe it feels to be the creative
intelligence that's inside the universe
and behind the universe different
aspects coming forward at different
times in the end in my heart of hearts I
call it my beloved because you do once
you enter into it once you dissolve into
it once you recover your true identity
within its identity then it opens up
dimensions of love within you and it
pours dimensions of love within you that
it becomes my beloved sometimes I call
it the great expanse something to
suggest the vastness its vastness its
power its creativity its intelligence
and of course since compassion is a mark
of oneness
its inherent oneness so that's one
compassion is a spontaneous
manifestation of its innate oneness hmm
yes for me I think he calls it some an
Indian guru who used the word the
beloved and that was the guy
in England he would refer to oneness he
refer to the beloved Tony Parsons talked
about unconditional love that that it's
but not the love that we would know it's
it's love beyond conditions beyond it's
not a personnal it's the allowance of
all things yeah it's it's a deeper love
than human love but I think it is alive
and the best of us when we experience
love but it is it's a radical love it so
it's the love that the doll has for the
10,000 things you know it's it is the
love that being has for its own self for
its own being because in the end from
its perspective all of us and all of
creation is a manifestation of its being
so how could it not love itself and
therefore how could it not love us mmm
so let's say can we go to go and this
ruse with Steve Urkel's say the idea of
my beloved and ace and who do you think
is describing when you say it's my below
who who is describing the beloved's you
know this sort of perspective because
there is a perspective that it cannot
see itself or me in reflections and it
because it is already what's happening
the Mohammed is already what's happening
there you know it can't it can only ever
appear as yeah and even you know where
I'm going with that I do you have a
sense yeah yeah I do it's very hard to
objectify in a wake when objectifying is
almost what is a part of the pelvis is
that happening already it's fresh
already you know it's it's it's already
complete in other words what you're
saying there once we're kind of talking
about experience that you've had and
you've written a book it's it gives the
impression of being once removed but
obviously it's a part already yeah you
know we have all sorts of ideas and
stories we tell ourselves about what
this total
the consciousness is and isn't and what
it can know and can't know and I think a
lot of that is just cultural scripting
it's it's our best guess it's our best
cultural guess and our best cultural
guess is not very old
at this juncture we've been kind of
making these metaphysical guesses Earth
intuitions for 5,000 years
but this intelligence is 13.7 + million
years in the making and unfolding and
we're just kind of getting to the stop
place in our evolution where we can
really begin to engage it so I my sense
is I don't know whether this
intelligence is not self-aware except
through us that seems kind of
outrageously puts enormous privilege of
place on us as to be the mirror of the
divine on why should we assume that this
intelligence is not self-aware as it
unfolds itself with seeming pointed
accuracy through time and space so what
I can say it is this when I lose my
boundaries as Chris Bosh well I allow
myself to dissolve as Chris page and
enter into these deeper layers there's
many many layers of this phenomenon so
some of the early layers have to do with
my species consciousness the the mind of
the collective unconscious the mind of
my species other layers have to do with
the mind of our planet Gaia
consciousness and there are multiple
layers going right through species mind
the archetypal mind archetypal
dimensions the root causes of some of
the patterns inside
time and space the root cause even of
time and space itself moving even deeper
into dimensions of oneness permutations
of oneness even entering into the primal
void that appears to be the the
formlessness out of which all form
emerges with the Big Bang and
subsequently and then entering beyond
even that and at each level of entry
entering into clear
in clear in clear states of being states
of awareness now yeah that and so it's
hard for me to imagine that the being
our dimension of being that I have been
in it for hours at a time would not also
be self-aware in its unfolding now it's
also been the case that I've had the
experience that this creative
intelligence are an aspect of creative
intelligence met me in my sessions took
me on a cosmic tour you know in that
chapter initiation in the universe and
it seemed to want to show me it's work
it seemed especially pleased to have
evolved consciousness to the point where
some of that consciousness could come
back and be shown what has actually been
being worked on for billions and
billions of years so it seems to delight
in being known but I wouldn't say
necessarily that it didn't know itself
before I knew it you know what I mean
have a sense of the the spies haven't
spent so much time that in a way you're
still only it's impossible it's so the
vastness takes straw or the scraping the
surface the enormity of the all of
everything yeah this was a major change
in my thinking it took place in the
fiftieth session so so my background is
I did four years of work I stopped for
six years and then I did 10 years of
work so 14 years of the active work over
20 years yeah
when I was entering into the last five
years of work or those years of what I
call the diamond luminosity work and
this was 26 sessions out of 26 sessions
that's about a third of all the sessions
in the book four of those sessions took
me into this diamond luminosity an
unbelievably beautiful ecstatic empty
consciousness that was just clear just
clear beyond imagination just so clear
so hyper clear that once you touch it
nothing else matters except returning to
it nothing else I had entered in earlier
stages mattered in the least compared to
connecting with this and this is what
the Buddhists call I think the closest
thing I could find is what they call
dharmakaya you know they have three
dimensions or three modalities of
existence dharmakaya sambhogakaya and
nirmanakaya dharmakaya being the deepest
in dharmakaya the absolute the light of
the clear light of absolute reality just
kind of the light out of which existence
emerges I'm sorry I got so involved in
the description I lost track with the
the original question focus where I
think I know we are going because we
were talking about the vastness and
scraping the surface and you cry yeah
yeah yeah so I was fifty sessions in I
was in the second of the four Diamond
luminosity sessions I was as deep into
ecstatic Diamond consciousness as I had
ever gone and would ever go it was the
deepest penetration in that way and
toward the end of the session I had this
experience where my visual field flipped
90 degrees a huge space opened up and
beyond where I was there was another
reality world's upon worlds beyond me
and there was a light there and a beam
of this light hit me and it shattered me
and I called the light the absolute
light just to give it a differentiating
name from the diamond luminosity light
but what it showed me was that there
were worlds and worlds beyond where I
was as far beyond where I was as the
diamond luminosity was beyond time and
space so that told me that an idea that
I had taken into this work that the
purpose of this work was to get to an
endpoint an end stage a destination to
go home something like this that that
was
just not an accurate assumption you do
repeatedly have a sense of going home
you do enter into deep deep experiences
of homecoming and for me the diamond
luminosity was my actual practical
destination I did not go deeper than
that
it totally satisfied me in all respects
I continued to do the session work but
for for the next 23 sessions it wasn't
going deeper into the diamond luminosity
but it was internalized think I'm a new
luminosity soaking deeper and deeper
into my physical and psychological being
but it's a it's an infinite ocean and I
don't I gave up completely the idea of
ever getting to the end of it
everything well in a sense I mean I I
have a tendency that you know what is
the term we use for not being able to
ineffable you know we like to say the
mystical is ineffable and I don't
necessarily agree with that I think
that's that's true I understand you know
language falters but I think making
ineffability of primary characteristic
of mystical experience I think it cuts
off rather than opens up I think we
should exhaust ourselves trying to
describe what lies at the edges of our
awareness rather than surrendering to
the silence so unfathomable in its one
sense but not unfathomable in another
sense I think I fathomed what I entered
I mean I went back again and again and
again and I stabilized consciousness and
I understood it but there are dimensions
beyond which I understood and even my
understanding of what I experienced is
admittedly limited ok but I wouldn't
want to say that the reality itself is
innately unfathomable I think we can
fathom but it takes hard work and
discipline ok there's a part of
and it's I think you kind of describe
the but it's the Royal we let's just say
you kind of describe it suppose you say
us creating everything the Royal us know
you haven't used the word the Royal but
that's that's the sense of me it's kind
of that is a generic feeling of ausmus
but in in that
yeah just curious a little bit what does
that bring back to you when i when i
mentioned that that you know a creation
what does that say yeah what does that
remind you first of all this it reminds
me to mention that this book is not
primarily a therapeutic story and it's
not a story about my personal healing or
my the work that the advice or the
counsel that I got from the universe at
a personal level from my personal life
it's not that I didn't receive those
things I did receive those things but
I've dropped them out for the most part
in the story in the story I'm focusing
on what took place during the peak hours
of these high intense sessions and it's
a fundamentally a cosmological story
it's a story about the universe and
about the the aspects of these sessions
that have generalizable significance
where we're touching dimensions of
reality that are dimensions that all
human beings share in in one way or
another so sometimes I I speak about the
we in the book because I'm basically
acknowledging that the what's important
in these experiences is not that I
experience them that's not the important
thing the important thing is that these
dimensions are available for all of us
to experience if we use sufficient
technologies and techniques to get into
these territories including non
psychedelic techniques and meditation
contemplation silence so and so forth
that's the important story so when when
you enter these
only expansive encompassing states of
consciousness here you're not an eye
when you go into it your your there's an
eye in the sense that you have
continuity of memory when you go in and
you come back you can remember it so
there is a sense in which eye is present
in order to facilitate recall but what
this eye has become in the point of
entry
you have ceased to function as an
individual in some of these I ceased to
function as a human being per se when
you're operating beyond the species mind
at archetypal realities levels you have
to cease to function as a human being
and you left have to learn how to be
conscious not as a human being is
conscious but in a totally new and
unprecedented way and the universe will
take you in and teach you it mean you
literally will give you exercises and
disciplined exercises which you repeat
it repeats over and over
inside the sessions and you have to take
the site the assignments you're given in
the sessions after the sessions and do
your homework in order to kind of enter
fully consciously
into subsequent sessions yeah I've
meander a bit on your question but you
could know but it's gotta be able to and
it's kind of interesting though even
though you didn't mention the personal
journey really in the book like you say
it was the bigger let's say other but
it's funny how the psychedelics seem to
always remind that element and it's kind
of like you know it'll give you this
list of things that say a swing but
there will be that will come up every
time yeah yes and almost like if you
have you be doing this this you know all
right but it's kind of like you're DEET
you I don't know what it is exactly
maybe it's eating well being nicer it's
all kind of very personal things yeah
it's personal yeah I mean I own the
journey it was my journey and it has all
my limitations into it
in it and what's important is whenever I
experienced that it be placed on a table
beside other people's experiences and we
look at lots of people's experiences
simultaneously to find how they fit
together what's the common ground
what's idiosyncratic you know if from a
philosophical perspective I want to know
what's real and one of the best ways to
know what's real is you know compare
lots of people's experiences of this
reality so we can see it through that
prism but within my own experience I own
that it is my journey it's a personal
journey and yet the most important parts
of the journey didn't really involve me
in a sense let's say the filter of Chris
Bosh was highly polished away shattered
deconstructed at the most important
parts of the journey you know when you
went through this suffering that
humongous amount of that suffering you
chose the ocean suffering he caused a
chair an ocean is pretty big just talk
about the ego death a little bit there
within that ocean of suffering do you
think as you were there in that or it
was just suffering you know to me it was
yeah or will you own that suffering or
then every time it felt like it's almost
you had to go through all that to be you
it's like the diamond the cross that
kind of symbology of all that suffering
is almost to kill the resistance and
then within that expansiveness can
happen you know well my understanding of
the ocean of suffering deepened and
changed over the years what happened is
after about two years two and a half
years of work first ten sessions I went
through what Stan Grof describes as the
perinatal
level of consciousness I felt like a
poster child for the perinatal severe
seizures existential crisis confronting
the meaninglessness of life so and so
forth reliving aspects of my birth and
eventually went through a deep and
shattering ego death experience where
everything I knew myself to be was
turned inside out and I was forced to
become the opposite of what I knew
myself to be I I was a male highly
educated white academic obsessed with
the meaning of life
I became women lots of women women of
color women who had no philosophical
interest whatsoever and and basically it
just shattered me just shattered my
identity and then took me into a deeper
spiritual dimension after one transition
experience I went then from that
condition into the ocean of suffering
which was an expanding landscape that
was systemic expanded year by year for
over two years of active session work 14
sessions just horrendous plains of human
suffering opening to thousands and
thousands of beings thousands of years
just unimaginable brutal brutalities and
at first I thought this was a deepening
of my ego death I didn't understand why
I had to go through this but based on
the information that I was working on at
the time I thought it was a deepening of
ego death but over time I changed my
mind on that and that is now I
understand that there are different
levels of the universe and what's
happening differs according to which
level you're operating on at this level
of the universe I was operating in
subtle level reality I was operating in
the context of the species mind and that
these tremendous purification processes
this encounter and of opening to the
pain and letting the pain in that it
moved through me was not really aimed at
my personal transformation but was aimed
at transforming some aspect of the
collective psyche so that the healing
being generated here was gent was aimed
at my species not at me personally and
this built up for two years actually
there was one year I stopped for six
years I started then six years later and
the ocean of suffering started exactly
where I had stopped six years before and
it continued deep and in deep and
eventually reached a crescendo of an
orgy of suffering and pain and then I
was spun into archetype of reality and
the ocean of suffering never returned so
I think that just there was a process of
cleaning out the personal unconscious
leading an ego death there was a
cleaning out or healing of some aspect
of the collective unconscious and then
being spun beyond the species mind into
archetypal levels of reality the way
what prevents this suffering from being
internalized in your system is trauma is
that when you do this work if you
surrender completely and let the session
take you wherever it wants to take you
even though it doesn't make sense at the
time it will take you to a culmination a
breaking point and then you will be spun
through that you'll go through to a
point of reconciliation of ecstatic
embrace and then what you internalize
and love what you internalize then is
the whole cycle the trauma the physical
violence or the psychological violence
break through and reconciliation harmony
so that it doesn't internalize as trauma
you learn the cycle you trust the cycle
I was willing to go back into the pain
for two reasons one because I felt a
calling to it I felt a destiny calling
me to engage his pain for in ways I
explained in the book but the other one
is that I really wasn't a glutton for
pain I hated the pain I was a glutton
for what lay on the other side of pain
or the insights in the ecstasy that I
got on the other side when I started
going through
on the second year of this ocean of
suffering and I broke through into the
series of sessions that I summarized in
that chapter initiation in the universe
one of the first things it did was take
me deep deep deep in time back to what
felt to be the font of creation and
there I was experienced the beginnings
of creation the Big Bang type of
experience and I experienced it as a a
choice that in some strange way I and
all of us had participated in that we
chose to participate in creation we
chose to participate voluntarily in the
act of creating a universe galaxies
solar systems the human species that the
suffering that we've encountered on this
agenda on this adventure is not being
inflicted on us it's something we chose
as kind of a passage of rite of passage
to participate in the creation or the
self-expression the self manifestation
of our universe chose chose yeah hard to
say what that means at the level of soul
that we're talking about but we're but
there are no conscripts here we are
volunteers I think we've said the sense
of no beginning no beginning I have to
think about that I you know that doesn't
ring a bell I have to say and say this
idea it does explode time psychedelic
explodes a sense of duration or let's
just say this idea of the infinity or
eternity our timelessness maybe more so
and
there's different modalities in which
time exists that you experience in
psychedelic states there is an
experience of timelessness or moving
beyond time moving outside of time and
space that's I've had that experience
I've gone there but there's another more
subtle dimension of time experience that
I call deep time deep time is moving
into temporal envelopes where different
spans of time can be experienced as
simultaneously now so in one of the
early sessions in teens I experienced
stable ease in seventh consecutive
sessions my life from beginning to end
all the experiences of my life as
simultaneously taking place now so I
experienced what it felt like to be old
in a distilled essence kind of way later
on I was taken into larger segments of
deep time what I would call collective
deep time where I was being taught or
shown aspects of human evolution that
required a larger time landscape in
order to show them to me maybe a
landscape of a hundred thousand years or
so and at the very end of the journey in
the 70th session and what I called the
final vision I was taken into a temporal
landscape who knows hard to describe the
scale but somewhere on the order of
maybe a million years so what I've come
away with is the conviction that there
there are different modalities of time
operating within the universe and I
don't be begin to understand how this is
possible
I've had some interesting conversation
with some physicists who are exploring
different temporal dimensions within the
universe I'm not a physicist all I know
is that I've been taken in and out of
time multiple ways in multiple frames of
reference only one of which is the
negation of time in itself most
frequently it allowed to experience
different modalities of time or
different aggregations of time hmm so
the idea if I said to you there is no
time what would you I would I would say
there are dimensions of existence in
which that's true time comes into
existence with space time and space is a
sort of a fundamental unit so when one
moves in a sense to the edges of space
you move into domains where time behaves
differently
so within space-time this time is very
convenient you know the arrow of time is
generally true but that doesn't seem to
exhaust the whole of the universe with
respect to time we now know that what
96% of the universe is dark matter and
dark energy which we don't know what the
hell's going on there so we're now
getting used to understanding that time
space is really just like the skin of an
apple mmm there's a lot going on
underneath the skin of the Apple that's
true for space it's also true for time I
think do you think time is related to
the send this sense of I an ego was
there a sense that when there is a
center in the universe let's just say
you know what your location base then
sometimes during the trip you can be
exploded they can be just gone gone gone
gone gone gone gone gone gone and in
that even this idea of any time that
it's almost a requirement of a separate
human who lives in time and a certain
amount of finite and who knows the world
knows this is earth and this is 2019 and
all these pillars of knowledge and
that's what's required that the little
piece in the center of all that that
holds it together this little me and
this world and that one
that's say gone that is just
timelessness and in that it's whatever
appears so yeah whatever is appearing
here in this conversation is all of
everything and whatever appears in the
vastness of one of those tricks is all
of everything yeah yeah right
you described very nicely I like your
description of how individual awareness
kind of anchors our sense of time and
when individual awareness is shattered
or blown out then our sense our
experience of time changes now I don't
know whether for everybody when
individual awareness becomes transparent
or Shunyata emptiness or is blown out I
don't know whether everybody necessarily
flips into pure timelessness my sense
I'd rather say there are different
modalities of time that we can move into
when we are don't are not so heavily
grounded in our physical body sense of
identity okay but yeah time becomes
course times becomes well it becomes
porous and we can experience we can have
insights that have to do with future
so-called future time we can have
insights of what's going on that violate
the patterns of space we can know
something that's going on that's outside
of our physical senses that's happening
now but far away in space we can have
experiences of something that's
happening far away in time so time does
get permeable yeah you did speak a bit
about this somehow being able to see
futures and I'd be familiar with that
and I've heard it in a good few places
too it's you know it's it does collapse
a lot of things mm-hmm
[Music]
the suppose yeah in that kind of say
yeah I just described from the G
wouldn't think that I had and I think
you've definitely you touch them and a
big bit in the book is this idealist and
you come out of this trip Pavan let's
just say tasted the infinite and then
you're gone from that's gone and you're
back to being phrase in the world
nothing to get up and do taxes whatever
and that sense of loss that it wasn't a
feeling of it not for you know it wasn't
ever-present or was that there's a big
bit about that kind of loss of the
feeling that you lost beloved
butts ml is almost coming back yeah when
one does allows ones egoic reality or
body mind identity to dissolve and
experiences that a deeper landscape of
the universe some aspect of the universe
it's a it's an awfully exciting and
affirming an empowering experience just
to have that experience of some aspect
of the intelligence that runs through
all things that is alive in all things
to have insights that convinced you that
you yourself participate in that
intelligence and you yourself are alive
in time in a way that expands beyond you
know your traditional ways of thinking
in my case I press so hard and so deep
into of the fabric of existence into the
fabric of the creative intelligence I
pushed into the diamond body of I'm
hesitant to speak about God and the
divine because that has those words have
so much cultural baggage around them you
don't want to import but
inevitably I you have to speak about a
purified or cleaned up vision of the
divine in order to that's the closest
vocabulary our culture has for pointing
to these extreme facets of existence I
pushed so deeply into that touched it so
intimately that when I stopped my
sessions not until I stopped my sessions
as long as I was going back and touching
this reality periodically through the
years I didn't have this sense of a deep
sadness that took came over after I
stopped my sessions I stopped my
sessions and in the years following I
began to miss this dimension of
existence there were good reasons which
I explained in the book why I felt I had
to stop my work but the consequences of
stopping the work was not being able to
have even a few hours at a time a few
times a year of exquisite intimacy with
this reality now there are beings who
because of their spiritual practice are
able to maintain some type of version of
this intimacy with transcendence with
the divine in their daily life and I
understand that all power and homage to
the great masters they're my heroes
they're my guiding lights I knew that in
my case I did not have the capacity at
this stage of my life to stabilize these
extreme states of consciousness it would
take not only years and years but
lifetimes of spiritual practice to
succeed in doing that so there was a
sense of true sense of loss I had to
contend myself with having had these
experiences but not being able to abide
continuously in those experiences and
that took a took a while I mean I
basically went into a sadness that was
so deep that I found that I was just
waiting to die hmm
I was I was taking care of my children I
was lecturing I was doing my
I work but in my heart I was just
waiting to die so that I could return to
the light and that over time I began to
realize you know that was really not a
good way to live I really had to see
what was at the bottom of this and what
was at the bottom of this I think is an
imbalance that I allowed to develop
between transcendence and imminence it's
all the divine the physical world is the
divine but there's a transcendent divine
and the imminent divine and I had
plunged so deep into the joy of the
transcendent divine that to a certain
degree I lost my footing inside the
imminent divine and I had to really
recommit myself to grabbing my physical
existence and being what I was as I was
here incomplete as I was for the
remainder of my life and I did and I
have kind of I'm fully grounded here and
I do my spiritual practice and I hope
that my sessions will continue to absorb
themselves into my body and my
transformation is not over yet it's a
work in progress
and you mentioned about the masters
having arrived almost her can I ask you
them what what do you think that would
look like at that place of arrival that
in daily life well again there are many
many levels to say these masters that
you mentioned the Masters the dimensions
but even the Masters I mean that there
are many levels of the ingredients of
masterhood and which these traditions
articulate with great detail
I think the first kind of point of entry
into this spiritually transformed
existence is one second let me take care
of something has just popped up on my
screen which is getting in the way
one of the the point of entry is I think
transparency we become transparent we
disagree let go of our egoic
identification and we are able to be
transparent to the larger flow of life
the larger matrix have cause and effect
and to the sheer immediacy of presence
inside physical existence and then from
there they're just degrees of deepening
and deepening and deepening so that some
masters have exists in such a deep
intersection of time-space reality and
spiritual reality that they can
literally leave their fingerprints in
stone I mean that's how much energy
they're carrying it's the level of
consciousness that they're living in
24/7 but so they're they're very beings
are surrounded by what we would call
miracles but they don't call the
miracles they call them the natural
consequence of integrating spirit
reality and physical reality into their
physical into their precious body so
there are levels and levels of mastery I
can envision and imagine what the lower
levels might look like
I mean I've taught courses and compared
as mysticism I've studied the Mystics
but what it would be like to actually
stabilize what I call the diamond
luminosity to live in a perpetual
awareness of diamond luminosity that's
hard for me to imagine likewise it's
hard for me to imagine being living in
conditions which have radically
transcended time as I have experienced
for a few hours at a time here and there
I mean that's just a radical state of
consciousness so I think in my
psychedelic work I started it with an
eye towards spiritual awakening
accelerating my spiritual enlightenment
personal transformation things like this
that quickly fell away as a not worthy
goal for the world
that I was doing Collective
transformation collective enlightenment
took its place and then later the
journey became a cosmological adventure
an adventure in exploring the deep
fabric of the universe at successive
levels it did not become a dot did not
retain its role as just trying to awaken
spiritually awakening spiritually was
this a perfectly good goal and agenda
but what happened in my sessions was
about something different than just
awakening spiritually it was about
exploring the deep fabric of the
universe and you don't have to explore
the deep fabric of the universe to
awaken spiritually and even to be God
realized even to be kind of fully
saturated with divine awareness this is
a different agenda and you see a part of
me and I didn't like the idea that there
was here and there this idea in
psychedelics but there was this realm
and this was not this realm
yeah and that and so I almost felt a
sort of a dissatisfaction wouldn't wear
another for a period of time anyway that
it was kind of okay it was hugely
experienced of two manga Slee but it's
almost it could become another path and
the path is endless in a way yeah path
of this idea of becoming now that seemed
to all fall away this and in the end no
I suppose what I'm trying to say is that
[Music]
I'm just curious about the first
question I asked you to start and back
into here but and in your book during
the trips it felt like everything was
during the trips bringing you back to
this
every time it seemed to me this which I
kind of liked that because I felt well
has to be this yeah has to be completely
what's happening as well as anything
else and I'm curious what's your sense
of that because it did seem to call full
circle in everything and I like that it
you went to the depth of hell and the
highest heavens but every time at the
end of the trip always you're returned
but even during the trip it felt like
towards the end of your journeys now
felt like you were brought back to
what's happening
yeah and that I liked I really liked
that because I just it from me it has to
be this hasn't been within the grasp of
a child can't be overly it has to be
this has to be what's happening and I
kind of liked that in the book not to
give it felt like everything brought you
back to this you you catch the arc of it
well and you describe it well in the
early sessions in the early years there
was a an acute sense of going out
experiencing a universe there was a
sense going out coming back always
coming back to right here right now
learning the lessons but going out
deeper and deeper into the universe and
then late in the sessions that changed
there was less of a sense of going
anywhere and more of a sense of being
here right here right now clear clear
clear cleaning cleaning cleaning right
here right now It was as if after taking
me scuse me so deep and giving me the
sample deep into the universe deep into
the diamond luminosity and then showing
me that there was a world of a world of
a world beyond that even still at that
point everything shifted in the last
twenty three sessions or so we're really
about cleaning cleaning cleaning right
here right now and the arc of the
sessions arced back towards something
like classical spiritual awakening to
the here and now to the consciousness
which is the ever the ever pure
effervescent source out of
which your moment to moment awareness
Springs out of which the universe
Springs moment to moment bringing back
to here now here and now yeah in the end
I think everything we do in all
spiritual practice and including all
psychedelic practice is all about
purification and a deepest sense we end
up where we started except that where we
started our mind was encumbered by all
sorts of conditioning and obscure
obscurations and in the end hopefully
those obscurations are gone and you have
the opportunity to experience what the
Buddhists call the nature of mind or
your mind in its natural condition our
Ockman are such eat Ananda yeah on that
then if I said to you that the below has
never left you that this is the
Beloved's happening
oh yeah that's never it's never acted
never left no the physical the physical
world is the body of my beloved I know
that it's just that on some days I can
experience her more completely than on
other days and on the day is when I
can't experience her completely and it's
all my fault only my fault
only my limitations I missed the days
when I could experience her it in
complete transparency and her complete
beauty well is my limitations it's only
my limitations you know so the
limitations are not in limitations of
the substance itself they're not the
limitations of reality it's only the
limitations of my ability to experience
the truth of what is at any point in
time a couple of them sort of questions
you you lose Alan Watts yeah oh you
could hear me sorry
once you do to Alan Watts and hanging up
the phone yeah this is what happens when
you don't hang up the phone which I
think it's great it's a great way to
describe the book in essence this is
what happens when you don't hang up the
phone yeah yeah what's the sense of that
thing like it is I mean Houston Smith
when he wrote his book cleansing the
doors of perception which is his
collected reflections on a lifetime of
scholarship as a professor religious
studies and and one that I'm very close
to because I taught out of Houston
Smith's books for decades in my world
religions course so I've internalized
his mind a lot but when he wrote that
collection of essays he had only taken
LSD six times and he said at that point
the bummers increased and the benefits
decreased and he took Alan watch's adage
seriously when you get the message hang
up the phone and I say this book is
about what happens if you don't hang up
the phone and if you don't hang up the
phone a long journey begins a journey
that goes deeper deeper and deeper and I
understand where the bummers increased
that's part of the death rebirth cycle
but if you're willing to submit to those
bummers or you're willing to submit to
that purification process the adventure
begins the adventure deepens and you're
just taken on layer after layer thus
following the cycle of death and rebirth
into deeper levels of initiation as a
philosopher that was extraordinarily
valuable to me now when you say we get
if you get the lesson hang up the phone
what were they referring to well I would
assume that they're referring to the
lessons of oneness which is comes up
often early in the work the truth of
oneness the teachings of one is the
compassion of oneness the ethics of
oneness the identity that one realizes
one one realizes that the entire world
is one at its
or all those things are very very good
but there's just so much more that we
can experience if we if we jump into so
my sense is it's a subtle interactive
dance between the mind doing the
exploring and the mind being explored so
small mind big mind and when we that the
mind being explored that the universal
mind is an infinite mind capable of
infinite experiences so the mind we drop
into it acts as a seed catalyst a seed
crystal that cradle it catalyzes a
certain set of experiences from its
infinite potential those experiences
change us they aluminous they purify us
they help us face our conference to
confront our restrictions so that the
next time we drop that mind into the
infinite ocean it's a different seed
tree seed crystal it's a different mind
and it elicits a still deeper set of
experiences out of the infinite
potential and if we keep this up we keep
this up we are changed by the journey we
the journey deepens were changed the
journey deepens that the universe
reveals itself multiple multiple layers
of the universe will systematically
reveal itself in an organized fashion my
experience at least was that it paid a
great deal of attention to making sure
that I understood every lesson as it was
being given me there were some sessions
which were retroactive and really kind
of going back in the past to explain
what I had experienced there were some
sessions which were more showing me
where we were going but they were always
in conscious dialogue with this creative
intelligence so the journey to me is
it's much more I mean right now we're
just getting started on the psychedelic
Renaissance you know the very important
works so important the ambitions right
now are modest get us getting it legal
learning the biology of psychedelics
more
they're how they do the work they do and
healing healing the personal psyche
healing from post-traumatic stress
healing from depression healing death
anxiety really really important work but
healing the personal unconscious is just
the first stage or the early stage of a
much much longer journey of exploration
[Music]
it's huge I suppose what I'm saying and
that's I think in a way the person has a
lot of DC for me first of all I like
this idea of the Hat I'm hanging up the
phone or not hanging up the phone I
think that's just a it's just a sentence
a oneness is doing it 73 times and
oneness is doing it once so that's to me
it's all happening and anyway I suppose
I I think the message is this that it's
it's it's it is dude the trip 55 trans
73 times and it's it's in the doing and
that the hanging up the phone is that
it's it's you can't hang up really
because that's who's going to hang up in
a way and that that this is the only
message is the decision but it's not a
kind of a fixed it yeah yeah yeah is
when you go in and out of non-ordinary
states of consciousness repeatedly you
in this way you just you really have to
face that terrible moment when you
realize that everything you've
experienced in your sessions is taking
place 24/7 you're just not tuned into it
so the joy the beauty the work the
clarity all of that is taking place
continuously
oneness does not stop being oneness just
because you start being I'm out of
paying attention to it it's all taking
place seriously so that you begin to
realize my god I'm living in heaven if I
pay attention if I'm if I'm not paying
attention then I'm living in the hell of
samsara we're where we are just pieces
bumping around in the meaningless
universe but if I'm paying attention the
innate oneness of the world springs into
flower around us so yeah well you see I
think that's that shimmering line
between what's happening and stories
from the past and from the future but
within what's happening there's no room
for it's almost objectifies the universe
by creating that separation that I am
here and I could pay attention to the
world out there and yes that reinforces
the separation but really it isn't
separate anyway there is no separation
anyway oh yeah yeah and in these
sessions you don't study the universe as
if through a microscope you open up to
that part of your being where you are
already that part of the universe so
it's always a matter of dissolving
boundaries within your own awareness
that allows you to experience as you say
what is right here right now
so you dissolve the part that keeps you
separate from it and when you then
dissolve completely into what's here
right now you then experience different
aspects of what's here right now so then
beyond stories of the other thing do you
know what you are if I if I don't know
what I am right now it's not because the
universe hasn't beaten it into my head
repeatedly and just showed me
mercilessly
the truth of my being and the truth of
all of our beings so I'd say yeah I know
what I am
that doesn't mean I can always hold that
in my awareness 24/7 but I've had ample
experiences of of what I am and that my
identity is essentially the identity of
the totality and with that experiences
tremendous relief tremendous release all
judgments are dissolved all judgments
good or bad are dissolved there is just
the the infinite joy of one's true
nature one's true reality and then the
joy of living consciously in that
reality rather than living unconsciously
in that reality if we live consciously
in that reality our life gets better and
better if we live unconsciously in that
reality then we're subject to the
fluctuations of karmic conditioning that
I put up to that we get caught in all
these scenarios so the trick is to stay
mindful to be aware that we are always
in subtle ways creating our reality and
we can always create a better reality if
we are more transparent to our nature
which turns out to be the same nature
which is bubbling up inside every living
thing in surround us every person every
object it's all one nature and in that
there is tremendous relaxation hmm I
think that's a nice way to finish
I think that's keep talking to you but
we have a book a couple of it's
available is it online now I put a link
you can send em as I can send you link
amazon.com in the United States has it
on I'll be releasing it November 26
I'm told that England Amazon will not be
releasing there until January 2nd
I would assume that Ireland probably is
more link to Amazon com.com
so either November 26 in America or
January 2nd in UK okay very good and
it's on is it on Kindle also it's it's
both on yes
and there will be an audiobook that will
be released I just finished recording it
it's going to be I recorded it for inner
traditions yeah yeah I mean it's it's an
epic journey epic is the only way you've
gone and I like how like I says very sad
also
I like how you haven't unnecessarily
glamorize you haven't
this isn't a prescription it's a
description of what you have gone
through and experienced and you've
managed it's like you when I was a kid I
used to go into dreams and I used to try
and take sweets out of the dreams and
bring them home and I'd wake up
disappointed that I couldn't bring her
sweets as yeah but in this book I think
you've managed to bring a few diamonds
from heaven so like one fair play and I
put the links on and I'll do a short
version of this then I do great thank
you Frank thank you for helping me bring
the book forward I really do appreciate
it
excellent questions I enjoyed our
conversation a lot yeah likewise thanks
for the chest thank you a good look with
this opens as well thank you thank you
very much bye bye
[Music]
[Applause]
i if you like the conversation that i
just had and you'd like more please hit
the subscribe button thank you
[Applause]
[Music]